[horse neighing]
Actor as Louverture I am
Toussaint Louverture.
My name is perhaps known to you.
[Narrator] He was called the
black George Washington.
He fought off three empires
and enraged Napoleon.
[Louverture] The prospect
of a black republic
is equally disturbing
to the Spanish,
the English, and
the Americans.
[Narrator] He championed
liberty and egalite for all.
Toussaint Louverture and
the Haitian Revolution.
[Announcer] This program
was made possible
by the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting
and by contributions
to your PBS station
from viewers like you.
as the poorest country in
the Western Hemisphere.
But during its height
at Saint-Domingue
it was the richest
place in the Americas.
The thing about it, though,
is that its richness
was all rooted in slaves.
Its wealth was based
on human capital,
on owning that human capital.
All day, as long as
the sun is shining,
the men are bending over
and swaying a machete at
the foot of the sugarcane.
The world, as you
knew it, disappeared.
Therefore, you
become an animal
and you expect to
live like an animal.
[no audible dialogue]
[Woman] The dominion of the
master had to be absolute,
but that absoluteness
itself made the master
into something other
than human as well.
Liberty, equality,
fraternity--
that was new for the world.
Toussaint Louverture is
the epitome of humanity.
He realized early on that
the condition he was in
was totally insufferable.
recruited about 3,000
to 4,000 people,
trained them, and they fought
the French, the British,
and the Spanish armies
for 12 years.
They burned the mechanisms
of their production--
they're burning the
plantation fields,
burning down the houses.
It was a wholesale massacre
on a really, really
enormous scale.
It was big, big
major payback time.
The Haitian Revolution
is probably the most
profound revolution
ever realized by human beings.
The only place where
slaves created a nation,
but nobody wants
to talk about it.
Aah!
[gunfire] [horses neighing]
[Narrator] In the
summer of 1789,
when Haiti was still
the dormant colony
of Saint-Domingue,
it was France that grabbed
the world's attention.
Parisian mobs rioted
against the French king
and against their own
desperate poverty.
Chanting slogans for liberty,
equality, and brotherhood,
they sparked the revolution
that would fill history books
for centuries to come.
The trick about the
French Revolution
was that it meant a
lot of different things
to a lot of different people.
[crowd cheering]
In the streets of Paris,
the French Revolution
meant an end to the appalling
privileges of wealth.
In France's
brand-new congress,
called the National Assembly,
it meant the ideas of Europe's
most radical thinkers
could be realized.
Nobody knows exactly what's
going to come out of it,
but just the idea of
having rights-- right?--
the idea that all
people have rights,
that those rights are inherent.
This was something
that obviously
philosophers had
written about before,
but during the course of
the French Revolution,
it was written down
in a text called
The Declaration of
the Rights of Man.
[Man] It's a dangerous idea
because the society is
based on inequality.
That's what makes it work.
Because it was not supposed
to work for everybody.
It was supposed to
work for a minority.
What was a dangerous
idea in France
was even more dangerous in
its slave-holding colonies
off the coast of Florida--
Martinique, Guadeloupe,
and an island known
as the Pearl of the Antilles.
Today, the western
half is Haiti.
Then, it was the French
colony of Saint-Domingue.
One thing that's fascinating
about that time--
people think these things
were very far away.
They were not.
News traveled very, very fast.
[Man] We have to
remember that the ocean
was like a highway
in the 18th century.
I mean, the ships
were constantly
bringing news back and forth.
Everyone was obsessed with news.
Sailors would come
off the ships,
the people they would
work with as they were
unloading the ships,
were enslaved people,
so there are reports
who were describing
the events of--
that had been going on
in Paris to the enslaved
that are working
alongside of them.
Few intended colonial slaves
should take democratic
ideas to heart.
Far too much was at stake.
Sugar greased the wheels of
the 18th century economy,
and Saint-Domingue
was the sugar capital
of the world.
It was easy, even for
France's political radicals,
to ignore the agony that
made it all possible.
The leaves of the sugarcane
are just like miniscule saws.
If they cut you, you
may not even see it.
But when you perspire,
the sweat gets in
it and it burns.
In the roots there are ants.
They bite.
you will scratch
yourself for half a day.
If the worker refused to work,
well, there is a law
where you just shoot him.
That's all.
The whole concept
of slavery itself
is a totally savage one.
The French,
they brought it down to science.
A slave coming from Africa
would not last three years,
the way the system
was organized.
They had it down to
that kind of statistics.
They did it very
systematically,
and it was very successful.
[no audible dialogue]
Slavery in Saint-Domingue
succeeded, too,
on a foundation of
relentless terror.
Slave owner Stanislas
Saint Fo ches
explained it as
rational management.
[Actor as Fo ches]
Slow punishments
make a greater impression
than quick or violent ones.
Rather than 50 lashes
administered in 5 minutes,
25 lashes of the whip
administered in a
quarter of an hour.
This is far more likely
to make an impression.
[Man] The accounts
about the tortures
inflicted on slaves
are often horrifying--
legs cut off or arms cut off,
amputations for runaways,
rubbing hot powder or pepper
and so forth into the wounds.
Slaves actually hung
and left to die.
You can kind of imagine
that this kind of a world
in which, essentially, human
life was given so little value
that these tortures
were kind of refined
to this incredible cruel effect.
Despite the brutal
tools of control,
some blacks managed
to escape slavery.
Many had been born free,
fathered by white planters.
Others had gained freedom
through their own
wits or talents.
One such man was
Toussaint Louverture.
[Louverture] I
was born a slave,
but nature gave me the
soul of a free man.
Toussaint Louverture was
a very determined man,
he was a very ambitious man,
and, in my opinion,
he was a genius.
Toussaint is, I think,
one of the most
incredible figures
that I know about in many ways.
He's born on a plantation
in Saint-Domingue.
He grows up on that plantation.
That plantation
was owned by a man
who was tolerant for the times.
Toussaint was taught to
read and write as a child.
[no audible dialogue]
He eventually occupies a
somewhat privileged role,
if you can say that on a
plantation, as a coachman,
and has a kind of
relationship with the managers
and masters, in some ways.
He becomes free in the 1770s,
so he's somebody
who kind of occupied
And I think that's the key
for understanding Toussaint,
is that he saw possibilities
where other people didn't.
[Man] He had businesses,
had contacts in the U.S.,
and elsewhere, bank accounts.
He managed his
affairs pretty well.
The man was endless in
organizational capacity.
I mean, he would have been
a fantastic CEO today.
[chatter]
Toussaint didn't record
his first reactions
to the revolution in France,
but his fellow free
Saint-Dominguans,
the white colonials,
and the mixed-raced population
were transfixed.
In 1799, there were about
40,000 white people
and about 30,000 colored
people who were--
of course, their sons and
cousins and so on and so forth
who were landowners
themselves,
many of them
slave-owners themselves,
many of them very
effective businessmen,
many of them involved
romantically
with the white master class.
One of the things
that's important
to remember about Haiti and race
is it wasn't simply
black and white.
Instead, you had numerous
gradations of color.
One historian went so far
as to give 110
categories of color
from absolute black
to absolute white.
And to each combination
he gave a name--
mulatto, quadroon, Mameluke.
And what he was accounting for
was the drops of black blood.
Whites hoped for more control
over the colony's governance,
but the colony's
mixed-race population
hoped for more
fundamental changes.
They had been born
free, but not equal.
They had to show
physical respect
for the white.
Stand up when they are
in presence of a white,
call them mister
or whatever title
they wanted to have.
It was not easy for them,
and that's exactly why
they were the first ones--
before the blacks--
they are the first ones
to ask for equality.
The mixed-race population
of Saint-Domingue
decided their chance
had come in 1791.
They sent a petition to
France's new government
asking for the rights
of citizenship.
This is a powerful message
to have been taking place
in a society that was
explicitly organized
on inequality.
It's like dynamite.
[Men speaking French]
The petition asked
for civil protections,
and it enraged the
island's white population.
Working-class colonists
began a full-scale
intimidation campaign.
They threatened,
beat, and murdered
mixed-race residents
in the capital.
But the petition met
a different reception
back in Paris.
The new breed of delegates
in the National Assembly
issued a landmark decree.
They extended equal rights
to the small population
of mixed-raced people
born of two free parents.
Despite the reform's
limited extent,
the governor of Saint-Domingue
refused to obey.
Colonial whites felt
profoundly betrayed.
Some, such as a planter's
wife named Madame de Rouvray,
began discussing radical
thoughts of their own.
[Actor as De Rouvray]
The National Assembly
is committed to destroying
our lives as masters.
So much so, that
secession from France
The slave-owners of America,
I hope, will band together
to stop this
contagion of liberty.
[Actor as Dutty] The good
Lord who created the sun
which gives us
light from above,
who rouses the sea and
makes the thunder roar,
watches us.
[Narrator] Boukman Dutty was
a slave and a voodoo priest.
[Dutty] Throw away the image
of the god of the whites
who thirst for our tears,
and listen to the
voice of liberty,
which speaks in the
hearts of all of us.
In August, 1791,
as Saint-Domingue's white
and mix-raced populations
squared off for a showdown,
Boukman called together slaves
from neighboring plantations.
They'd been kidnapped from
different parts of Africa,
and the voodoo religion
was their common culture.
Boukman had called them to
an area called Bois Ca man.
First on the agenda
was strategy.
[Man] That ceremony
of Bois Ca man
is the first Haitian congress,
the beginning of the revolution.
[Man singing in native language]
Haitian tradition says the
slaves of Saint-Domingue
planned that night to revolt.
They timed their uprising
to start on multiple plantations
in two weeks' time.
And they swore each
other to secrecy.
[singing continues]
They even said that
they killed a pig
and they drank the blood.
This is what we
call the communion.
Communion that to keep
what you have heard,
what you have said
to themselves.
[Dutty] The god of the white
man calls him to commit crimes.
Our god orders revenge.
He will direct our
hands. He will aid us.
[Men singing in native language]
On the night of
August 22, 1791,
a thousand enslaved Africans
attacked their masters.
[Man] For them to be free,
they have to have the
same amount of violence
that you exerted on them.
That's why the revolution
was very brutal.
This is that hatred,
in the first day,
that came out.
[people screaming]
The rebel numbers grew
from 1,000 to 20,000
as newly-liberated slaves
burned cane fields
and refineries
in order to destroy the system
that had enslaved them.
the most profitable
plantations in the Americas
had been laid waste--
184 sugar plantations
and a thousand coffee farms.
Whites and mixed-race people
fled to the capital city
for mutual protection.
From there, they watched
fire storms on all horizons.
You've got a fiery
cataclysm of enormous scale.
I mean, the people on
ships in the harbor
supposedly could read their mail
by the light of these
fires that were, you know,
10, 15, 20 miles away, to
give you some faint idea
of what this would have been
like if you were there.
The eruption of violence
put Toussaint Louverture
in a difficult position.
His own fortunes were tied
to the plantation system,
and he had straddled the
white and black worlds
for some 15 years.
Toussaint was no longer a slave.
He didn't have the
mentality of a slave.
He was the owner of two
or three plantations.
He was not of the
same class anymore.
His interests were different
from the interests
of the masses.
But Toussaint's first reaction
to the raging violence
was based neither
on money nor race.
It was personal.
He went back to the plantation
where he had been born
to protect his former owners.
[Man] It's true that
Toussaint Louverture
did return to the plantation
in the early days
of the insurrection
and kind of maintained
order there.
And there's always-- there's
the question of why--
I think Toussaint was
somebody who understood
the value of humanity
in many ways, right?
And I think he probably
had gained that
precisely from being on the
receiving end of slavery.
Back in the capital city,
as Toussaint helped
his former master
flee the violence,
Saint-Domingue's whites
repelled assault after assault.
They soon regrouped
and launched their
own offensive.
The bloodletting
continued day after day,
week after soul-numbing week.
French colonist
Pamphile de Lacroix--
[Actor as de Lacroix]
The country is filled
with dead bodies
which lie unburied.
The Negroes have left the whites
with stakes driven through them
And the white troops
who take no prisoners
leave Negroes dead
upon the field.
Three months after the
revolution started,
the voodoo priest Boukman Dutty
was killed in battle.
White soldiers decapitated him
and burned his body in
view of the rebel camp.
In the words of one observer,
The conflict in Saint-Domingue
had become an exterminating war.
[neighing]
[Narrator] In the
autumn of 1791,
Toussaint Louverture
could no longer sit
on the sidelines.
Despite a wife and children,
despite the chance even of
losing his own freedom,
Toussaint didn't hesitate long.
He left everything,
he dropped everything,
and he went to the mountain.
It was an act of
extraordinary risk.
The island's 500,000 slaves
outnumbered whites by 12 to 1,
but their ultimate
prospects were poor.
Few had experience
in military strategy
and they had no unifying
history or long-term vision.
didn't really know what freedom
was supposed to look like.
Nobody had really even theorized
or imagined this before.
Toussaint, on the other hand,
had a unique window
on the world.
He was schooled in African
and European culture alike,
and had read some of France's
most radical thinkers.
[Man] Toussaint had certainly
read a text by L'abbe Raynal
which predicted that out of
the colonial slave system
with its, you know, frightening
imbalance of numbers
and horrible
suffering and all that
there would emerge a leader,
revolutionary leader.
I believe Raynal referred to him
as a black Spartacus.
Toussaint was a literary person.
There's no way he
would have missed this.
As rebel leaders
struggled to forge
a disciplined fighting force,
Toussaint's talents and
intellect set him apart.
Then, in December, 1791,
some four months after
the rebellion began,
black enthusiasm
began to crumble.
The new French
government in Paris
sent more than 10,000
military reinforcements
to help the colonists
reestablish white rule.
Supplies were scarce
in the mountains
and winter brought famine
to the rebel lines.
Thousands began to surrender.
Toussaint Louverture
was not somebody who
liked violence, really.
He was good at it
if he had to do it,
but he preferred
to use negotiation,
diplomacy, guile,
trickery, anything, but...
And if that didn't work,
he'd kill you, no problem.
But he'd try
anything else first.
Toussaint Louverture
was asked to write up
a settlement offer.
In exchange for the freedom
of 200 slave leaders
and better working conditions
on the plantations,
the proposal offered to
send most of the rebels
back to the plantation.
It was a stark recognition
of 18th century realities.
Sometimes it's easy
to look back at this
and suggest that
they were willing
to sell out their followers.
While the terms,
I think it's true,
are troubling in some ways,
they were also trying
to seek some change.
And I think the key here is
that it was really difficult
to imagine that you would
actually eliminate slavery.
New French commissioners
had just arrived from Paris
to restore order.
More liberal than
the planters,
they urged
Saint-Domingue's whites
to accept the rebels' offer
and they called slave leaders
to the capital of Le Cap
for negotiations.
Trust was minimal.
Some slave rebels wanted to kill
their white prisoners,
but Toussaint Louverture
argued against it.
He wanted the whites
returned to Le Cap
as a gesture of goodwill.
So Toussaint is sent to
negotiate with the planters
with the idea that, in a sense,
a settlement can be reached.
The settlement is not only
for the freedom of some
of the insurgent leaders,
but also for some reforms
on the plantation.
Small reforms,
but reforms that,
at least in the
letters they describe,
their followers really want.
Whether the small
group of leaders
actually would have
had the power to say
to all of these people
that they'd taken,
Okay, you're going
back to work now.
Here's your chains.
I don't know.
the white people
were so short-sighted
that they didn't even give
him the opportunity to try.
[Man] The whites said no.
They said no because
at that time,
they were the ones
who wanted revenge.
They forget about what they
have done for three centuries
and they think that they were
the victims in that thing.
So they have to
avenge themselves,
so they're not going to
forgive or forget anything.
They refused.
[no audible dialogue]
Of course he's taking
up arms against them.
But at the same time, he's
made a lot of concessions
and he's struggled
against his own followers
to say, look, we're going to
treat their prisoners well,
we're going to trade with them,
we're willing to make a deal.
And to have that refused
by the planter class
I think certainly must have
had a radicalizing effect.
Toussaint's support for a
settlement abruptly ended,
and with it the best deal
the whites would ever see.
[people shouting]
[horses neighing]
[Narrator] Back in France,
the democratic revolution
had turned to terror.
France's revolutionary army
was at war with
neighboring countries.
Its radical leaders
sought to purge themselves
of enemies from within.
They executed thousands.
And in early 1793, they
did the unthinkable.
The revolutionary government
beheaded the king.
Events in France
were moving faster
than anyone had ever intended.
I mean, this was
volcanic upheaval,
a true class revolution
that turned everything
completely upside-down.
And each ripple that came out
would strike the shores
of Saint-Domingue.
One of the biggest
ripples from France
that washed into
Saint-Domingue's shores
was a commissioner named
Leger-Felicite Sonthonax.
He was a French revolutionary
with radical ideas about
life in the colony.
Sonthonax arrives
in Saint-Domingue
having already had bad
words said about him.
There are people who have
actually written from France
to the colonists on
Saint-Domingue saying,
Watch out for this guy.
He's an abolitionist, he
wants to abolish slavery.
[chatter] [chickens clucking]
Saint-Domingue's
mix-raced population
had so far retained its fragile
alignment with the whites.
To ensure that continued,
Sonthonax created a
representational council
on the island and invited
mixed-race citizens to serve.
He even brought mixed-raced mn
into the colonial government.
And a lot of white planters
are really, really
upset about that,
and see him as--
that as a really
destructive force.
The white planters
had cause for worry.
Less than two years after
joining the rebellion,
Toussaint Louverture had risen
to the top of the rebel army.
[Actor as Louverture] I
am Toussaint Louverture.
My name is perhaps known to you.
In 1793, he wrote
an open letter
to the island's disenfranchised.
I have undertaken vengeance.
I want liberty and equality
to reign in Saint-Domingue.
I'll work to bring
them into existence.
Unite yourselves
to us, brothers,
and fight with us
for the same cause.
With his letter, he
announces two things.
He announces first of
all, his commitment
to the process-- to the
project of emancipation.
And he announces his
presence as a leader.
He has gained great
respect from his followers.
he's essentially saying,
You want freedom,
and I'm the one who's gonna
bring you that freedom.
So I'm the person to
follow in this regard.
But Toussaint, at this time,
was addressing the
wider world, too.
He was particularly
focused on Spain.
The Spanish wanted
to wrestle the colony
away from France
for two reasons.
First, the colony was
very, very prosperous,
in spite of the war.
And second, that prosperity
was used by the
French Revolution
to combat them in Europe.
Spain controlled
Saint-Domingue's
neighboring colony.
So in June of 1793,
Toussaint struck a deal.
Spanish garrisons,
just over the border,
provided guns and ammunition
to the slave army
and tipped the
balance their way.
Toussaint's forces
captured three cities
within eight months.
Saint-Domingue's white planters
were desperate.
Many hated the new
order in France.
In a treasonous move,
they invited the
British to help put down
the slave rebellion.
Now, the empires of
France, Spain and England,
along with a vast
army of former slaves,
were fighting for control
of the small island colony.
Then, in early 1794,
events in Paris caused
another explosion
A multi-racial delegation
from Saint-Domingue
had appeared in France's
National Assembly.
They had been sent by
Commissioner Sonthonax
with a dramatic message.
He had pledged freedom to
Saint-Domingue's slaves
for fighting the armies
of Britain and Spain.
The emissaries made a
compelling argument.
These are the principles
and the ideals of France
and we fully represent them.
And we wish to continue
to represent them
And so we've come to
present our arguments
about why we are, in
fact, truly committed
to those ideals
and principles,
and how we epitomize
these principles
of the French Revolution.
I think it was very powerful
for the representatives
of France
to hear essentially that what
had happened in the Caribbean
is that the white slave
owners had deserted France.
They had gone over
to the British.
And the true people-- the true
Republicans inSaint-Domingue--
were these enslaved people who
just wanted their freedom.
The French National Assembly
endorsed the emancipation
of Saint-Dominguan slaves.
But that was not all.
The delegates freed slaves
throughout the
entire Empire, too.
And there's rejoicing
and celebration.
There's an older woman,
a free woman of color,
who's traditionally
gone to the debates
who, sort of, sheds tears
and is brought
down and celebrated
as part of this moment.
And there are speeches in Paris.
Celebrations of this
event throughout France.
It's really seen as
a kind of triumph
for the ideals of the
French Revolution.
That this worst
form of hierarchy--
enslavement and oppression--
has been abolished
in the Caribbean.
It was utterly unprecedented.
In a stroke, nearly a
million black slaves
had become French citizens.
Word that the French
Revolutionary government
had freed its slaves
reached Saint-Domingue quickly.
It was one of history's
great watersheds,
and due largely to
the extraordinary
military accomplishments
of Toussaint's army.
But the credit did not
rest with Toussaint alone.
He had several able commanders
working under him.
Men like Jean-Jacques
Dessalines,
who shared his soldier's
life experiences
more closely than Toussaint.
Dessalines had been mistreated
in slavery considerably.
He had tremendous
whip scars on his back
that he liked to
display on occasion.
He had deep reserves
of anger and violence.
But also a very intelligent man.
For Dessalines and Toussaint,
emancipation changed everything.
They quickly trimmed their sails
to the new order.
Toussaint realized
that Spain had a king,
and France was talking about
Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.
All men equal.
So he realized that
although he first started
by fighting the French,
the French right now
could be the best help
they could receive.
So he rejoined the French.
After three years
in opposition,
Toussaint Louverture
was once again
a loyal French citizen.
So were his followers.
It tipped the balance.
Toussaint, Dessalines, and
their army of ex-slaves,
pushed the Spanish
out of Saint-Domingue.
The British soon followed.
Word of Toussaint's
astonishing string of victoris
against white armies
was spreading across
the European world.
They didn't like it.
They didn't like it at all
that there was a black
general beating white armies.
They didn't like it.
Slaveholders
everywhere were stunned
and worried.
In the United
States, for instance,
they didn't want even
white Frenchmen to come
because they would
tell the story.
Why are you running away
fromSaint-Domingue?
They would answer that.
And no matter what
they answered,
it would be known that
there was a black revolt.
[Actor as Louverture]
We confronted dangers in
order to gain our liberty
and we will be able to confront
death in order to keep it.
Slaves had once
accepted their chain
because they had not experienced
a state happier than slavery.
But those days are over.
The people of Saint-Domingue
would rather be buried
in the ruin of their country
than suffer the
return of slavery.
Toussaint's ringing language
showed his profound attachment
to democratic ideals.
But there was another
side to Toussaint, too.
Anybody who looked like
they threatened Toussaint,
either ended up
dead or deported.
Toussaint had already
been appointed
brigadier general and then
governor of Saint-Domingue.
No black man had ever risen
so far in the colonies.
But Toussaint had a rival--
The beloved French
civil commissioner,
Felicite Sonthonax.
Sonthonax was extremely popular
because he was the one to say,
Okay, slavery is abolished.
He was very popular.
And the blacks used
call him Papa Sonthonax.
That didn't go well
with Toussaint.
Toussaint is very
friendly with Sonthonax
as long as Sonthonax
can serve his purposes.
And nothing personal about it.
When Sonthonax
becomes useless,
we will send him
back over there.
That's as simple as that.
And in 1797,
Toussaint, in fact, no
longer needed Sonthonax.
In a series of
political maneuvers,
he isolated the
civil commissioner.
Then in August,
he forced Sonthonax
off the island.
Toussaint Louverture
had triumphed again.
[Narrator] In 1798,
as Toussaint
Louverture was evicting
the last of the British
from his island,
another French general
battled British interest
halfway around the
world in Egypt.
His name was Napoleon Bonaparte.
[Man] Well, Toussaint
and Napoleon in many
ways are similar.
Both were a little bit from
the margins of French society.
They succeeded through
military brilliance
and they were both
incredible military leaders.
And they became
political leaders
as a result of their
military experience.
But Napoleon's victories
would put Toussaint's at risk.
Just months after
conquering Egypt,
Napoleon marched into Paris.
A coup d'etat toppled the
revolutionary government
and Napoleon took
the reins of power.
The revolution is
over, he declared.
I am the revolution.
As Napoleon is rising
to power in France,
Toussaint is watching closely
He knows several things.
He knows first of all,
that there are very powerful
pro-slavery voices in France
who are agitating against
him, attacking him,
and proposing that slavery
actually be recreated
in some form in Saint-Domingue.
Toussaint believed
Saint-Domingue's survival
and the survival
of freedom itself
depended on his ability
to mobilize people
to rebuild the
devastated economy.
And in Toussaint's mind,
that meant one thing.
His black followers should
return to the cane fields.
There were some compelling
reasons for this.
I mean, mainly, in
Toussaint's situation,
he was really in a
bind at that point.
Uh, in the sense that
his hope for peace was restoring
productivity on the plantations.
Recreating the sugar
trade, in particularly.
But nobody wanted to go
back to that kind of work.
So he pretty well
had to force them.
And then the people
began to think,
Hmm. This is a lot like slavery.
Maybe a little too
strong with the blacks
on several occasions.
But he had to do it.
He had to do it.
To be a leader,
you've got to know
where to lay back,
and you have to
know when to say,
Okay, guys. Go
ahead. Let's do it.
If you don't do it, well,
whatever the consequences,
you'll pay for it.
Most newly freed slaves
didn't see it that way.
They wanted to work
for themselves,
growing crops for food
rather than export.
Toussaint's luster
began to tarnish.
Napoleon, on the other hand,
was riding high.
and proclaimed a new
constitution for France.
Far from enshrining
black emancipation,
it opened the door for France
to reinstitute slavery
in its colonies.
When Louverture heard that,
he really understood that
something was changing.
And more ominously,
he understood that
he didn't have any way
to influence Napoleon.
And what he did in typical
Toussaint fashion,
Okay. Saint-Domingue is
gonna have its own laws?
Well, here they are.
I'm in charge here.
I might as well write
the constitution.
Toussaint's constitution decreed
slavery would never exist
in Saint-Domingue again.
And it was the first in history
to prohibit discrimination
based on skin color--
a milestone that U.S.
law would not guarantee
for another 150 years.
The constitution had
troubling elements, too.
It made Toussaint
governor for life,
with sole authority to
designate his successor.
Toussaint's a
great hero to me,
but this was not a good idea.
I mean, he basically,
with that gesture,
installed permanent
military dictatorship,
which has remained a problem
in Haiti for two centuries.
He could have done
what he needed to do
without that, I think.
I'm not quite sure
why he did it.
But that was enough to send
Napoleon over the edge.
Napoleon Bonaparte had
had enough of revolution.
And according to Napoleon,
the U.S. President,
Thomas Jefferson,
shared his view.
[Actor as Bonaparte] The
prospect of a black republic,
is equally disturbing
to the Spanish,
the English, and
the Americans.
Jefferson has promised
that at the instant
the French army has arrived,
all measures will be
taken to starve Toussaint.
Rid us of these guilty negroes
and we will have nothing
more to wish for.
Toussaint tried urgently
to show Napoleon
that military logic,
proved the merit
of black ambitions.
Toussaint was writing Napoleon.
He wanted so much
to be recognized
as saving this land for France.
His efforts failed.
In 1802,
Toussaint was stunned to see
the largest French expeditionary
force ever assembled
entering
Saint-Domingue's harbor.
Its mission was simple.
Napoleon wanted to
turn back the clock.
[Bonaparte] My
decision to destroy
the authority of the
blacks in Saint-Domingue
is not so much based
on consideration
of commerce and money,
as on the need to block forever
the march of the
blacks in the world.
Toussaint Louverture fought
the invading French ary
for three grueling months.
But the island's
black population,
now disenchanted
with his leadership,
offered lackluster support.
On May 6th, 1802,
Toussaint Louverture
surrendered.
At first, he was allowed
to retire from the army
with full honors.
he was called to a meeting
with the French commander.
[Actor as Louverture]
If I wanted to count
all the services
that I have rendered
to the French government,
I will need several volumes,
and still I wouldn't
finish it all.
Toussaint was arrested on
charges of conspiracy.
He wrote some stuff that's
very eloquent of saying,
I rather suspect that
it's because of my color
that you're treating me
like a common criminal,
although I prefer
not to believe this.
[Louverture] And
to compensate me
for all the services, they
arrested me arbitrarily
They choked me and dragged
me like a criminal,
without any decorum or
concern for my rank.
Is that the recompense
due my work?
Normally, a mutinous
French officer
would have been brought
before a military tribunal,
so he comports himself
as if he's gonna
have a military trial.
Toussaint's sons had
been educated in France.
They had even met Napoleon.
Hoping again that Napoleon
would understand his thinking,
Toussaint peacefully
boarded a ship for France.
Saint-Domingue
remained mostly calm
Jean-Jacques Dessalines and
the other black officers
continued cooperating
with French general,
Victor Leclerc.
But then, news arrived
from the nearby colony
of Guadeloupe.
Napoleon had reinstated slavery.
Leclerc reported that he
hadDessalines in his pocket,
and controlled him and
had mastered his spirit.
Well, ha, ha. He was
extremely wrong about that.
Saint-Domingue erupted
in anger and fear.
Dessalines quickly
broke from France.
One more time,
the former slaves
of Saint-Domingue
took to the field
against European armies.
Dessalines is a no-holds
barred, no-compromising leader
and figure who is going
to eradicate anything
that stands in the
way of what the people
have been mobilizing towards.
[Man] It's generally
reported thatDessalines
killed all the white people--
a massacre of all white people.
A race war.
No, not really.
There was one
report by a survivor
who managed to get
out, to escape,
by masquerading
as an American,
'cause Dessalines was
not killing Americans
or English, just French.
Aah!
One fleeing white,
Pierre Chazaud,
paused on a mountaintop
to observe the devastation.
[Actor as Chazaud]
No less than ten
square leagues of country,
burning like volcanoes.
The rapidity of the
conflagration was such
as to make the beholder
believe that large,
and thick trains of gunpowder
had previously been laid down.
The war becomes this
extreme scorched earth
kind of campaign in which
Dessalines and
others burn the towns
in order to, basically,
leave the French
with little-- with no
choice but to depart.
Dessalines' scorched
earth tactics worked.
In 1803,
the French army was
finally driven out.
50,000 French
soldiers had died.
And Saint-Domingue, Haiti,
became the world's
first black republic.
This is a powerful story.
It wasn't just an
anti-colonial revolution.
But it was, also, an
anti-slavery revolution,
in that it said, Your
economy and your privilege
which is based
on forced labor,
cannot stand-- It
will not stand.
It's a message that
translates through time.
Independence is the
strongest feeling
of human being.
I think we all, in some ways,
have inherited something
from this revolution.
Because it's really
the first place
that people insisted
absolutely that
human rights were
for all people.
It's something that
everybody should know about.
To know exactly
what our species--
not black people,
but our species--
can realize.
But Toussaint Louverture
never lived to see victory.
By the time Haiti
attained the goal
he fought so hard to achieve,
the imprisoned revolutionary
had died in a freezing cell
in the mountains of France.
In overthrowing me,
Louverture wrote as
he left for France,
you have only cut down the trunk
of the liberty tree of the
blacks in Saint-Domingue.
It will spring back
from the roots,
for they are numerous and deep.